{{header
 | title    = [[../|Confucian Analects]]
 | author   =  |override_author= [[Author:Confucius|Confucius]]'s students
 | translator= James Legge
 | section  = Book XVII. Yang Ho.
 | previous = [[../XVI|Book XVI.]]
 | next     = [[../XVIII|Book XVIII.]]
 | notes    = 
}}

{{lang|zh|陽貨第十七}}

BOOK XVII. YANG HO.


{{lang|zh|【第一章】【一節】陽貨欲見孔子、孔子不見、歸孔子豚、孔子時其亡也、而往拜之。遇諸塗。【二節】謂孔子曰、來、予與爾言、曰、懷其寶而迷其邦、可謂仁乎。曰、不可。好從}}

{{sc|Chapter}} I. 1. Yang Ho wished to see Confucius, but Confucius would not go to see him. On this, he sent a present of a pig to Confucius, who, having chosen a time when Ho was not at home, went to pay his respects for the gift. He met him, however, on the way.

2. Ho said to Confucius, "Come, let me speak with you." He then asked, "Can he be called benevolent who keeps his jewel in his


{{lang|zh|事而亟失時、可謂知乎。曰、不可。日月逝矣、歲不我與。孔子曰、諾、吾將仕矣。}}

{{lang|zh|【第二章】子曰、性相近也、習相遠也。}}

{{lang|zh|【第三章】子曰、唯上知與下愚不移。}}

bosom, and leaves his country to confusion?" Confucius replied, "No." "Can he be called wise, who is anxious to be engaged in public employment, and yet is constantly losing the opportunity of being so?" Confucius again said, "No." "The days and months are passing away; the years do not wait for us." Confucius said, "Right; I will go into office."

{{sc|Chapter}} II. The Master said, "By nature, men are nearly alike; by practice, they get to be wide apart."

{{sc|Chapter}} III. The Master said, "There are only the wise of the highest class, and the stupid of the lowest class, who cannot be changed."


{{lang block|zh|【第四章】【一節】子之武城、聞弦歌之聲。【二節】夫子莞爾而笑曰、割雞焉用牛刀。【三節】子游對曰、昔者偃也、聞諸夫子曰、君子學道則愛人、小人學道則易使也。【四節】子曰、二三子、偃之言是也、前言戲之耳。}}

{{lang|zh|【第五章】【一節】公山弗擾以費畔、召、子欲往。【二節】子路不說、曰、末}}

{{sc|Chapter}} IV. 1. The Master, having come to Wu-ch'ang, heard there the sound of stringed instruments and singing.

2. Well pleased and smiling, he said, "Why use an ox knife to kill a fowl?"

3. Tsze-yu replied, "Formerly, Master, I heard you say,—'When the man of high station is well instructed, he loves men; when the man of low station is well instructed, he is easily ruled.'"

4. The Master said, "My disciples, Yen's words are right. What I said was only in sport."

{{sc|Chapter}} V. 1. Kung-shan Fu-zao, when he was holding Pi, and in an attitude of rebellion, invited the Master to visit him, who was rather inclined to go.

2. Tsze-lu was displeased, and said, "Indeed, you cannot go! Why must you think of going to see Kung-shan?"


{{lang|zh|之也已、何必公山氏之之也。【三節】子曰、夫召我者、而豈徒哉、如有用我者、吾其爲東周乎。}}

{{lang|zh|【第六章】子張問仁於孔子、孔子曰、能行五者於天下爲仁矣。請問之、曰、恭、寬、信、敏、惠、恭、則不侮、寬、則得眾、信、則人任焉、敏、則有功、惠、則足以使人。}}

3. The Master said, "Can it be without some reason that he has invited {{sc|me}}? If any one employ me, may I not make an eastern Chau?"

{{sc|Chapter}} VI. Tsze-chang asked Confucius about perfect virtue. Confucius said, "To be able to practise five things everywhere under heaven constitutes perfect virtue." He begged to ask what they were, and was told, "Gravity, generosity of soul, sincerity, earnestness, and kindness. If you are grave, you will not be treated with disrespect. If you are generous, you will win all. If you are sincere, people will repose trust in you. If you are earnest, you will accomplish much. If you are kind, this will enable you to employ the services of others.


{{lang|zh|【第七章】【一節】佛肸召。子欲往。【二節】子路曰、昔者由也、聞諸夫子曰、親於其身、爲不善者、君子不入也、佛肸以中牟畔、子之往也、如之何。【三節】子曰、然、有是言也、不曰堅乎、磨而不磷、不曰白乎、涅而不緇。【四節】吾豈匏瓜也哉、焉能繫而不食。}}

{{sc|Chapter}} VII. 1. Pi Hsi inviting him to visit him, the Master was inclined to go.

2. Tsze-lu said, "Master, formerly I have heard you say, 'When a man in his own person is guilty of doing evil, a superior man will not associate with him.' Pi Hsi is in rebellion, holding possession of Chung-mau; if you go to him, what shall be said?"

3. The Master said, "Yes, I did use these words. But is it not said, that, if a thing be really hard, it may be ground without being made thin? Is it not said, that, if a thing be really white, it may be steeped in a dark fluid without being made black?

4. "Am I a bitter gourd! How can I be hung up out of the way of being eaten?"


{{lang|zh|【第八章】【一節】子曰、由也、女聞六言六蔽矣乎。對曰、未也。【二節】居、吾語女。【三節】好仁不好學、其蔽也愚、好智不好學、其蔽也蕩、好信不好學、其蔽也賊、好直不好學、其蔽也絞、好勇不好學、其蔽也亂、好剛不好學、其蔽也狂。}}

{{sc|Chapter}} VIII. 1. The Master said, "Yu, have you heard the six words to which are attached six becloudings?" Yu replied, "I have not."

2. "Sit down, and I will tell them to you.

3. "There is the love of being benevolent without the love of learning;—the beclouding here leads to a foolish simplicity. There is the love of knowing without the love of learning;—the beclouding here leads to dissipation of mind. There is the love of being sincere without the love of learning;—the beclouding here leads to an injurious disregard of consequences. There is the love of straightforwardness without the love of learning;—the beclouding here leads to rudeness. There is the love of boldness without the love of learning;—the beclouding here leads to insubordination. There is the love of firmness without the love of learning;—the beclouding here leads to extravagant conduct."


{{lang|zh|【第九章】【一節】子曰、小子、何莫學夫詩。【二節】詩可以興。【三節】可以觀。【四節】可以群。【五節】可以怨。【六節】邇之事父、遠之事君。【七節】多識於鳥獸草木之名。}}

{{lang|zh|【第十章】子謂伯魚曰、女爲周南召南矣乎、人而不爲周南召南、其猶正牆面而立也與。}}

{{sc|Chapter}} IX. 1. The Master said, "My children, why do you not study the Book of Poetry?

2. "The Odes serve to stimulate the mind.

3. "They may be used for purposes of self-contemplation.

4. "They teach the art of sociability.

5. "They show how to regulate feelings of resentment.

6. "From them you learn the more immediate duty of serving one's father, and the remoter one of serving one's prince.

7. "From them we become largely acquainted with the names of birds, beasts, and plants."

{{sc|Chapter}} X. The Master said to Po-yu, "Do you give yourself to the Chau-nan and the Shao-nan. The man who has not studied the Chau-nan and the Shao-nan, is like one who stands with his face right against a wall. Is he not so?"


{{lang|zh|【十一章】子曰、禮云禮云、玉帛云乎哉、樂云樂云、鐘鼓云乎哉。}}

{{lang|zh|【十二章】子曰、色厲而內荏、譬諸小人、其猶穿窬之盜也與。}}

{{lang|zh|【十三章】子曰、鄉原、德之賊也。}}

{{lang|zh|【十四章】子曰、道聽而塗說、德之棄也。}}

{{sc|Chapter}} XI. The Master said, "'It is according to the rules of propriety,' they say.—'It is according to the rules of propriety,' they say. Are gems and silk all that is meant by propriety? 'It is music,' they say.—'It is music,' they say. Are bells and drums all that is meant by music?"

{{sc|Chapter}} XII. The Master said, "He who puts on an appearance of stern firmness, while inwardly he is weak, is like one of the small, mean people;—yea, is he not like the thief who breaks through, or climbs over, a wall?"

{{sc|Chapter}} XIII. The Master said, "Your good, careful people of the villages are the thieves of virtue."

{{sc|Chapter}} XIV. The Master said, "To tell, as we go along, what we have heard on the way, is to cast away our virtue."


{{lang|zh|【十五章】【一節】子曰、鄙夫、可與事君也與哉。【二節】其未得之也、患得之、既得之、患失之。【三節】苟患失之、無所不至矣。}}

{{lang|zh|【十六章】【一節】子曰、古者、民有三疾、今也或是之亡也。【二節】古之狂也肆、今之狂也蕩、古之矜也廉、今之矜也忿戾、古之愚也直、今之愚也詐而已矣。}}

{{sc|Chapter}} XV. 1. The Master said, "There are those mean creatures! How impossible it is along with them to serve one's prince!

2. "While they have not got their aims, their anxiety is how to get them. When they have got them, their anxiety is lest they should lose them.

3. "When they are anxious lest such things should be lost, there is nothing to which they will not proceed."

{{sc|Chapter}} XVI. 1. The Master said, "Anciently, men had three failings, which now perhaps are not to be found.

2. "The high-mindedness of antiquity showed itself in a disregard of small things; the high-mindedness of the present day shows itself in wild license. The stern dignity of antiquity showed itself in grave reserve; the stern dignity of the present day shows itself in quarrelsome perverseness. The stupidity of antiquity showed itself in straightforwardness; the stupidity of the present day shows itself in sheer deceit."


{{lang|zh|【十七章】子曰、巧言令色鮮矣仁。}}

{{lang|zh|【十八章】子曰、惡紫之奪朱也、惡鄭聲之亂雅樂也、惡利口之覆邦家者。}}

{{lang|zh|【十九章】【一節】子曰、予欲無言。子貢曰、子如不言、則小子何述焉。【三節】子曰、天何言哉、四時行焉、百物生焉、天何言哉。}}

{{sc|Chapter}} XVII. The Master said, "Fine words and an insinuating appearance are seldom associated with virtue."

{{sc|Chapter}} XVIII. The Master said, "I hate the manner in which purple takes away the luster of vermilion. I hate the way in which the songs of Chang confound the music of the Ya. I hate those who with their sharp mouths overthrow kingdoms and families."

{{sc|Chapter}} XIX. 1. The Master said, "I would prefer not speaking."

2. Tsze-kung said, "If you, Master, do not speak, what shall we, your disciples, have to record?"

3. The Master said, "Does Heaven speak? The four seasons pursue their courses, and all things are continually being produced, but does Heaven say anything?"


{{lang|zh|【二十章】孺悲欲見孔子、孔子辭以疾、將命者出戶、取瑟而歌、使之聞之。}}

{{lang|zh|【廿一章】【一節】宰我問、三年之喪期已久矣。【二節】君子三年不爲禮、禮必壞、三年不爲樂、樂必崩。【三節】舊穀既沒、新穀既升、鑽燧改火、期可已矣。【四節】子曰、食夫稻、衣夫錦、}}

{{sc|Chapter}} XX. Zu Pei wished to see Confucius, but Confucius declined, on the ground of being sick, to see him. When the bearer of this message went out at the door, (the Master) took his lute and sang to it, in order that Pei might hear him.

{{sc|Chapter}} XXI. 1. Tsai Wo asked about the three years" mourning for parents, saying that one year was long enough.

2. "If the superior man," said he, "abstains for three years from the observances of propriety, those observances will be quite lost. If for three years he abstains from music, music will be ruined.

3. "Within a year the old grain is exhausted, and the new grain has sprung up, and, in procuring fire by friction, we go through all the changes of wood for that purpose. After a complete year, the mourning may stop."

4. The Master said, "If you were, after a year, to eat good rice, and wear embroidered clothes, would you feel at ease?" "I should," replied Wo.


{{lang|zh|於女安乎。曰、安。【五節】女安、則爲之、夫君子之居喪、食旨不甘、聞樂不樂、居處不安、故不爲也、今女安、則爲之。【六節】宰我出。子曰、予之不仁也、子生三年、然後免於父母之懷、夫三年之喪、天下之通喪也、予也、有三年之愛於其父母乎。}}

5. The Master said, "If you can feel at ease, do it. But a superior man, during the whole period of mourning, does not enjoy pleasant food which he may eat, nor derive pleasure from music which he may hear. He also does not feel at ease, if he is comfortably lodged. Therefore he does not do what you propose. But now you feel at ease and may do it."

6. Tsai Wo then went out, and the Master said, "This shows Yu's want of virtue. It is not till a child is three years old that it is allowed to leave the arms of its parents. And the three years" mourning is universally observed throughout the empire. Did Yu enjoy the three years" love of his parents?"


{{lang|zh|【廿二章】子曰、飽食終日、無所用心、難矣哉、不有博弈者乎、爲之猶賢乎已。}}

{{lang|zh|【廿三章】子路曰、君子尙勇乎。子曰、君子義以爲上、君子有勇而無義、爲亂、小人有勇而無義、爲盜。}}

{{lang|zh|【廿四章】【一節】子貢曰、君子亦有惡乎。子曰、有惡、惡稱人之惡者、惡居下流而訕上}}

{{sc|Chapter}} XXII. The Master said, "Hard is it to deal with him, who will stuff himself with food the whole day, without applying his mind to anything good! Are there not gamesters and chess players? To be one of these would still be better than doing nothing at all."

{{sc|Chapter}} XXIII. Tsze-lu said, "Does the superior man esteem valour?" The Master said, "The superior man holds righteousness to be of highest importance. A man in a superior situation, having valour without righteousness, will be guilty of insubordination; one of the lower people having valour without righteousness, will commit robbery."

{{sc|Chapter}} XXIV. 1. Tsze-kung said, "Has the superior man his hatreds also?" The Master said, "He has his hatreds. He hates those who proclaim the evil of others. He hates the man who,


{{lang|zh|者、惡勇而無禮者、惡果敢而窒者。【二節】曰、賜也亦有惡乎。惡徼以爲知者、惡不孫以爲勇者、惡訐以爲直者。}}

{{lang|zh|【廿五章】子曰、唯女子與小人、爲難養也、近之則不孫、遠之則怨。}}

{{lang|zh|【廿六章】子曰、年四十而見惡焉、其終也已。}}

being in a low station, slanders his superiors. He hates those who have valour merely, and are unobservant of propriety. He hates those who are forward and determined, and, at the same time, of contracted understanding."

2. The Master then inquired, "Ts'ze, have you also your hatreds?" Tsze-kung replied, "I hate those who pry out matters, and ascribe the knowledge to their wisdom. I hate those who are only not modest, and think that they are valourous. I hate those who make known secrets, and think that they are straightforward."

{{sc|Chapter}} XXV. The Master said, "Of all people, girls and servants are the most difficult to behave to. If you are familiar with them, they lose their humility. If you maintain a reserve towards them, they are discontented."

{{sc|Chapter}} XXVI. The Master said, "When a man at forty is the object of dislike, he will always continue what he is."