{{translation header
 | title      = [[The She King]]
 | author     = anon
 | translator = James Legge
 | section    = Guan ju
 | previous   = 
 | next       = 
 | language   = zh
 | notes      = Opening poem in the ''{{w|Classic of Poetry}}'', and is one of the best known poems in Chinese literature. It has been dated to the seventh century BCE, making it also one of China's oldest poems. The title of the poem comes from its first line (Guan Guan ju jiu), which evokes a scene of ospreys calling on a river islet. Fundamentally the poem is about finding a good and fair maiden as a match for a young noble.{{WP link|1=Guan ju}}<br>The [[w:Meter (poetry)|meter]] is [[w:octosyllable|octosyllabic]] in the original Chinese; Legge chose to use an irregular meter (averaging about 10 syllables per line) for his English translation.
}}
<noinclude>
{| border="0" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="5" style="margin: auto;"
! Translation !! Original Chinese !! Transliteration<br>(modern Mandarin, {{w|pinyin}})</noinclude>
|- style="vertical-align: top;"
|<poem>
Guan-guan go the ospreys, 
On the islet in the river. 
The modest, retiring, virtuous, young lady: ― 
For our prince a good mate she. 

Here long, there short, is the duckweed, 
To the left, to the right, borne about by the current. 
The modest, retiring, virtuous, young lady: ― 
Waking and sleeping, he sought her. 

He sought her and found her not, 
And waking and sleeping he thought about her. 
Long he thought; oh! long and anxiously; 
On his side, on his back, he turned, and back again. 

Here long, there short, is the duckweed; 
On the left, on the right, we gather it. 
The modest, retiring, virtuous, young lady: ― 
With lutes, small and large, let us give her friendly welcome.

Here long, there short, is the duckweed; 
On the left, on the right, we cook and present it. 
The modest, retiring, virtuous, young lady: ― 
With bells and drums let us show our delight in her. 
</poem>
| <poem>
關關雎鳩、在河之洲。

窈窕淑女、君子好逑。


參差荇菜、左右流之。

窈窕淑女、寤寐求之。


求之不得、寤寐思服。

悠哉悠哉、輾轉反側。


參差荇菜、左右采之。

窈窕淑女、琴瑟友之。


參差荇菜、左右芼之。

窈窕淑女、鐘鼓樂之。</poem>
| <poem>
Guānguān jūjiū, zài hé zhī zhōu.

Yǎotiǎo shūnǚ, jūnzǐ hǎoqiú.


Cēncī xìngcài, zuǒyòu liú zhī.

Yǎotiǎo shūnǚ, wùmèi qiú zhī.


Qiú zhī bùdé, wùmèi sīfú.

Yōuzāi yōuzāi, zhǎnzhuǎn fǎncè.


Cēncī xìngcài, zuǒyòu cǎi zhī.

Yǎotiǎo shūnǚ, qínsè yǒu zhī.


Cēncī xìngcài, zuǒyòu mào zhī.

Yǎotiǎo shūnǚ, zhōnggǔ lè zhī.
</poem>
|-
|}
{{PD-old}}

[[Category:Chinese poetry]]
[[Category:Love poetry]]

[[zh:詩經/關雎]]